Criminal charges were dropped Tuesday against a Mississippi man accused of mailing poisoned letters to President Obama and two other officials.

One day after the F.B.I. said it could find no evidence that the man, Paul Kevin Curtis, was behind the plot, a federal judge released him from jail and federal authorities shifted focus to another person of interest in the case.

Lawyers for Mr. Curtis, 45, a celebrity impersonator, said he had been framed by a longtime personal enemy, J. Everett Dutschke, a martial arts instructor from Tupelo, Miss. F.B.I. agents raided Mr. Dutschke’s house but did not immediately bring charges against him. Mr. Dutschke, reached by phone, denied involvement but did not elaborate.

At a news conference after his release, Mr. Curtis said he did not harbor any ill feelings toward prosecutors or the president and was relieved to be free. “I respect President Obama,” he said. “I love my country and would never do anything to pose a threat to him or any other U.S. official.”

Mr. Curtis, a party entertainer who dresses and sings as Elvis, Prince, Johnny Cash, Bon Jovi and others, had been in jail since Wednesday. He said he had never even heard of ricin. “I thought they said rice,” he said. “I said I don’t even eat rice.”

This month, Mr. Obama; Senator Roger Wicker, Republican of Mississippi; and Sadie Holland, a Lee County judge, received threatening letters postmarked Memphis and filled with a white powder. Tests confirmed it was ricin, a poison made from castor beans that can be lethal.

The letters read: “Maybe I have your attention now even if that means someone must die. This must stop. To see a wrong and not expose it, is to become a silent partner to its continuance.” They were signed: “I am KC and I approve this message,” a phrase that Mr. Curtis had used on his Facebook page.

According to a senior federal law enforcement official, the authorities were first drawn to Mr. Curtis because the language used in the letters was strikingly similar to language he had used before in letters to elected officials.

Prosecutors did not immediately respond to questions about the dropped charges. A court filing released Tuesday said the “ongoing investigation has revealed new information.”

Mr. Curtis thanked God and his lawyer for his release. A father of four, he has a long history of mental illness, including bipolar disorder, his friends and family have said. Last week, as he faced 15 years in jail, friends stood by him.

“He’s definitely been framed,” said Carol Scott, a longtime friend who is a nurse in Brisbane, Australia. “All I can tell you about him is he’s a well-respected man. He would not be guilty of anything.”

On Monday, an F.B.I. agent, Brandon Grant, said that investigators had not found ricin or ingredients for making it while searching Mr. Curtis’s house or vehicle. The F.B.I.’s search of Mr. Curtis’s computer found no evidence that he researched making ricin, Mr. Grant said.

On Tuesday, Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader, said another ricin-laced letter may have been discovered at Bolling Air Force Base in Washington. Mr. Reid said he knew no details, and the base, where the Defense Intelligence Agency Headquarters is, did not release any information.

Mr. Dutschke was a rival of Mr. Curtis, according to Mr. Curtis’s lawyers. It is not known exactly why the two men began arguing, but Mr. Curtis said they swapped angry e-mails for years.

In January, Mr. Dutschke was arrested on charges of child molesting. He was released on a bond of $25,000 and is awaiting trial.

In 2007, he ran for a seat in the State Legislature and lost to the incumbent, Steve Holland. Mr. Holland’s mother is Sadie Holland, the judge who received one of the letters.
The portrait investigators have begun to piece together of the two brothers suspected of the Boston Marathon bombings suggests that they were motivated by extremist Islamic beliefs but were not acting with known terrorist groups — and that they may have learned to build bombs simply by logging onto the online English-language magazine of the affiliate of Al Qaeda in Yemen, law enforcement officials said Tuesday.

The investigation into the bombings is still in its earliest stages, and federal authorities were still in the process of corroborating some of the admissions that law enforcement officials said were made by the surviving suspect in the attacks, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, 19. But they said some of his statements suggested that the two brothers could represent the kind of emerging threat that federal authorities have long feared: angry and alienated young men, apparently self-trained and unaffiliated with any particular terrorist group, able to use the Internet to learn their lethal craft.

Senator Marco Rubio, a Florida Republican who serves on the Senate Intelligence Committee, told reporters after emerging from a two-hour classified briefing with F.B.I. and intelligence officials Tuesday evening that the suspects were most likely radicalized over the Internet, but that investigators were still searching for possible sources of inspiration or support overseas.

“The increasing signals are that these were individuals who were radicalized, especially the older brother, over a period of time — radicalized by Islamist fundamentalist terrorists, basically using Internet sources to gain not just the types of philosophical beliefs that radicalized them, but also learning components of how to do these sorts of things,” Mr. Rubio told reporters.

“This is a new element of terrorism that we have to face in our country,” Mr. Rubio said. “We need to be prepared for Boston-type attacks, not just 9/11-type attacks.”

Dzhokhar Tsarnaev admitted to playing a role in the marathon bombings, which killed three people and wounded more than 260, and told federal agents that he and his brother were motivated by extremist Islamic beliefs, when he was interviewed Sunday at the hospital, law enforcement officials said.

Mr. Tsarnaev, who was recovering from gunshot wounds he received Friday while trying to elude the police, said that he and his brother had not been acting with any terrorist groups, the officials said, and told the investigators that they had learned about building explosive devices from Inspire, the online English magazine of the Qaeda affiliate in Yemen.

Now investigators will try to check Mr. Tsarnaev’s statements as they conduct a wide-ranging inquiry into the lives of the two brothers, speaking with people who knew them and looking at everything from items they left behind in their homes and, in the case of Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, his dorm room, to the lengthy digital trail they left through their e-mails and posts on social media sites. Investigators are still interested in a trip that his brother, Tamerlan Tsarnaev, 26, made to Dagestan and Chechnya last year.

Tamerlan Tsarnaev was killed early Friday morning after he was shot by the police and struck by the car his brother was driving as the younger man escaped, law enforcement officials said.

One law enforcement official said that investigators were interested in learning whether Tamerlan Tsarnaev’s wife, Katherine Russell, knew anything about the bombings.

“At one point, we were looking very hard at her, but less so now,” the official said. “But we are still looking at her.”

A lawyer for Ms. Russell released a statement on Tuesday saying that reports about her husband and her brother-in-law’s involvement in the Boston Marathon bombing came as “an absolute shock.” The lawyer, Amato A. DeLuca, also said that Ms. Russell, who grew up in North Kingstown, R.I., and met Mr. Tsarnaev when she was a student at Suffolk University, was “doing everything she can to assist with the investigation.”

Martin Richard, the 8-year-old boy killed in the bombings, was remembered at a private funeral with his immediate family on Tuesday morning. “This has been the most difficult week of our lives, and we appreciate that our friends and family have given us space to grieve and heal,” his parents, Bill and Denise, said in a statement.

And in Stoneham, Mass., roughly 12 miles outside Cambridge, hundreds of mourners attended a funeral Mass for Sean A. Collier, a campus police officer at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who was shot and killed last Thursday night.

A law enforcement official said that the brothers had been linked to Officer Collier’s shooting by a man they carjacked later Thursday night. The brothers told the carjacking victim that they had killed a police officer and committed the marathon bombings, the official said.

Investigators believe that the officer was killed in an attempt to get his gun, the official said, adding that there were indications that the men had tried — but failed — to remove it from its triple-lock holster.

When Dzhokhar Tsarnaev spoke to investigators on Sunday, officials said, he indicated that he and his brother had learned to make the pressure-cooker bombs that they used at the marathon from Inspire, the online Al Qaeda magazine.

The magazine’s first issue came out in mid-2010, and contained bomb-making instructions in articles with titles like “Make a Bomb in the Kitchen of Your Mom.” Intelligence officials identified Samir Khan, a 24-year-old American, as the editor of the publication.

Mr. Khan, who grew up in Queens and North Carolina, proclaimed in the magazine in 2010 that he was “proud to be a traitor to America.” He was killed in the drone strike in Yemen in September 2011 that killed Anwar al-Awlaki, the radical Yemeni-American cleric who officials said was one of the Qaeda group’s top leaders and propagandists.

The brothers may have been planning the marathon attacks for several months. On Feb. 6, Tamerlan Tsarnaev bought fireworks at a Phantom Fireworks store in Seabrook, N.H., about an hour’s drive north of Boston, said William Weimer, the vice president of Phantom Fireworks, which is based in Youngstown, Ohio, and has 68 stores in 15 states.

“He came in and he asked the question that 90 percent of males ask when they walk into a fireworks store: ‘What’s the most powerful thing you’ve got?’ ” Mr. Weimer said in a telephone interview, adding that the store’s clerk had described the sale as “uneventful.”

Mr. Tsarnaev settled on a reloadable mortar kit called a Lock and Load, which comes with a launch tube and shells, Mr. Weimer said. But Mr. Weimer said that even if the brothers had harvested all the powder from the shells Mr. Tsarnaev bought that day, he did not believe it would have yielded enough explosives to make the two pressure cooker bombs that exploded on Boylston Street and the other devices that the suspects had with them when they were chased by the police early Friday morning.

Mr. Weimer said that his company, which sold fireworks in 2010 to Faisal Shahzad, who unsuccessfully tried to detonate a car bomb in Times Square, had checked its records for Mr. Tsarnaev’s name as soon as it was made public, and had given the information to the F.B.I.

Elmirza Khozhugov, 26, the ex-husband of Tamerlan Tsarnaev’s younger sister, Ailina, said that Tamerlan Tsarnaev had been enamored of conspiracy theories, and that he was also concerned by the wars in the Middle East.

“He was looking for connections between the wars in the Middle East and oppression of Muslim population around the globe,” Mr. Khozhugov said in an e-mail. “It was very hard to argue with him on themes somehow connected to religion. On the other hand, he did not hate Christians. He respected their faith. Never said anything bad about other religions. But he was angry that the world pictures Islam as a violent religion.”

Dzhokhar Tsarnaev’s court-appointed lawyers took their first formal steps on Tuesday toward preparing his defense, filing a motion to request that the court provide them with additional expertise in death penalty cases.

Miriam Conrad, of the federal public defender’s office, asked Marianne B. Bowler, a federal magistrate judge, to appoint two lawyers “learned in the law applicable to capital cases.”

Outside the home of the Tsarnaev brothers’ parents in Makhachkala, Russia, friends of the family told reporters Tuesday afternoon that their mother, Zubeidat Tsarnaeva, had grown distraught after seeing a photograph of Tamerlan Tsarnaev on television.

Kheda Saratova, a well-known Chechen human rights activist and friend of the family, told reporters: “Please don’t torture this family, they want to wait awhile, they are in terrible grief. Please.”

“We must defend this family while the case is being investigated, so we can’t say anything for now,” she said.

Mrs. Tsarnaeva, who has given a number of interviews in recent days, walked out from behind her wearing a bright yellow head scarf, and made her way, through a scrum of photographers and reporters, to hail a taxi. “My son is just my son,” she said in English.
PARIS — Israel and the Palestinians agreed on Tuesday to renewed involvement by Unesco, the United Nations cultural agency, in the Old City of Jerusalem. The agreement was a small but significant breakthrough in the often highly politicized workings of the agency.

The deal concerns the Old City and its walls, including the Western Wall and an ascent to the Temple Mount, or Haram al-Sharif. It was brokered in an unusual partnership between the United States and Russia, with the help of Jordan, Brazil and the director general of Unesco, Irina Bokova. As part of the arrangement, the Palestinians agreed to postpone five resolutions critical of Israel that were pending before the agency.

The willingness of the Palestinians to table the resolutions was a direct result of recent visits to the Middle East by President Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry, who secured a Palestinian agreement not to “initiate negative moves in international organizations,” said a Middle Eastern ambassador to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, as Unesco is formally known. The agency, which is based in Paris, accepted the Palestinians as full members in 2011, though the United Nations has not done so.

David T. Killion, the American ambassador to Unesco, said the deal “represents a critical step forward toward depoliticizing Unesco, and signals a major shift toward a more constructive approach to cultural heritage issues.”

The Palestinian ambassador, Elias Sanbar, called the deal “an achievement, as for the first time for years we have obtained the implementation of one of the many Unesco decisions concerning Palestine.” He praised Jordan, and he said the agreement “results from the deep belief of our delegations to adopt positive and constructive positions,” while accepting “the postponement of legitimate and fair resolutions.”

The Israeli ambassador, Nimrod Barkan, called the agreement “the culmination of a joint Israeli-American effort, interestingly enough with Russian help since January, to try to move to depoliticize Unesco.”

For Israel, the deal represents a concession to the Palestinians because it runs the risk that Unesco experts will criticize Israel’s custodianship over the Old City and its holy sites, which most countries regard as occupied territory. The Old City and its walls will continue to be listed by Unesco as “endangered” World Heritage sites, but Israel will have a right of approval over the experts Unesco assigns to the city.

For their part, the Palestinians are conceding a six-month pause in their regular condemnation of Israel in resolutions over issues like Gaza, the West Bank and education.

Under the arrangement, a 2010 deal for a Unesco “action plan” to inspect and safeguard the cultural heritage of the Old City of Jerusalem and its walls, including archaeological work, will finally go into effect, with a visit by three experts in mid-May. A group of experts will also convene in Paris next month to discuss what is called the Mughrabi Ascent, the way that non-Muslim visitors (including the Israeli authorities) reach the Haram al-Sharif from the area of the Western Wall below. After a sand embankment there collapsed nearly 10 years ago, a temporary staircase was built, and it has proved controversial. The aim is to forge an agreement among Israel, the Palestinians and Jordan, which administers the Haram al-Sharif, on what should replace the temporary staircase.

Western ambassadors to Unesco gave considerable credit to the Russian ambassador, Eleonora Mitrofanova, who has worked to break the pattern of politicization at the agency, including casting an initial vote six months ago against the Arab bloc on the Palestinian resolutions. Her American counterpart, Mr. Killion, is said to have worked to consolidate the diplomatic opening, and the two ambassadors wrote an unusual joint letter to the head of Unesco’s Executive Board in February outlining the compromise that was sealed on Tuesday.

“Progress would also be a clear manifestation of our objective for Unesco to foster peace, dialogue and reconciliation through heritage,” the ambassadors wrote.

The United States reacted to Unesco’s recognition of the Palestinians in 2011 by cutting off its annual contribution, which supplied 22 percent of the agency’s budget. Israel also cut off its contribution. Since then, Unesco has struggled to make ends meet, cutting staff members and programs, and there is resentment in the organization that the Obama administration has so far failed to get Congress to approve a renewal of contributions.
CHICAGO — On a stormy evening this spring, nurses at Dr. Gary Stuck’s family practice were on the phone with patients with heart ailments, asking them not to shovel snow. The idea was to keep them out of the hospital, and that effort — combined with dozens more like it — is starting to make a difference: across the city, doctors are providing less, but not worse, health care.

For most health care providers, that would be cause for alarm. But not for Advocate Health Care, based in Oak Brook, Ill., a pioneer in an approach known as “accountable care” that offers financial incentives for doctors and hospitals to cut costs rather than funnel patients through an ever-greater volume of costly medical services. Under the agreement, hospital admissions are down 6 percent. Days spent in the hospital are down nearly 9 percent. The average length of a stay has declined, and many other measures show doctors providing less care, too.

This approach is one small part of a growing effort by providers to hold down costs without restricting needed care. Nationwide, health care spending has grown over the last three years at the slowest rate since the federal government started keeping data more than 50 years ago. While the bulk of that is related to the poor economy, changes among insurers and health care providers have contributed as well. If the trend continues, even at a reduced pace, it could help alleviate Washington’s long-term deficit problems and ease the strain on family budgets.

“The part that’s not driven by the economy, that’s the part we can theoretically control,” said Drew Altman, president of the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation. “If we can shave even a small percentage off of it, it has a huge impact on public programs, a huge impact on premiums, a huge impact on employers.”

But even as more health systems seek to replicate Advocate’s early success, its experience shows just how hard it may be to expand the approach and keep medical costs from resuming their relentless rise.

“It’s hard to imagine that you could start from scratch and do this and be successful in three years, said Dr. Lee Sacks, Advocate’s chief medical officer, noting that other systems may find it far harder to flip the traditional fee-for-services system on its head. “We had a running head-start going back to 1995.”

Nonetheless, the Affordable Care Act, President Obama’s health care law, has helped encourage a shift to Advocate’s payment model. Such agreements were merely a theory four years ago. But an estimated 428 accountable-care organizations now cover four million Medicare enrollees and millions more people with private insurance.

Under Advocate’s deal with Blue Cross Blue Shield, certain patients are assigned to the accountable care framework — about 380,000 — and their health costs are projected. If Advocate achieves savings below that amount while meeting explicit quality targets, it splits the money with the insurer. If not, its revenue is at risk.

In some ways, accountable care resembles earlier efforts to control medical spending, including the health maintenance organizations that proliferated in the 1980s but fell out of favor, in part because they severely limited patients’ choices. But accountable care differs by giving doctors and hospitals a direct financial stake in saving money and a reason to invest in various programs of preventive care rather than relying exclusively on the fees they would normally earn from providing services.

“There’s an enormous amount at stake in getting these reforms to work,” said Alan Krueger, the chairman of President Obama’s Council of Economic Advisers.

To help control costs, Advocate has hired scores of workers to coordinate care and keep an eye on the highest-cost patients, like those who are obese or have diabetes. It started providing doctors’ offices with report cards on their performance. Dozens of quality-control measures cover items as varied as blood pressure, rehospitalizations for asthma attacks or the use of expensive imaging machines.

On a blustery spring morning, those changes were visible in Advocate care centers across the metropolitan area. Sumera Khan, a clinical pharmacy specialist, popped into the hospital room of Noraine Scarpelli, an elderly woman with congestive heart failure, to check her prescription drug levels, an additional level of scrutiny that can help prevent complications. In another building, Dr. Karen O’Mara flicked between eight computer screens, peering at intensive care patients miles away, ready to alert a doctor if they looked in distress.

Advocate, a faith-based nonprofit, has an advantage over other health systems just jumping into what is more broadly known as “value-based care.” In the late 1990s, well before it forged its contract with Blue Cross Blue Shield, Advocate began taking steps to control costs and improve quality. A decade ago it adopted a “clinical integration” program, requiring doctors to work together on patients in common. It was also a pioneer in the use of electronic health records.

“A lot of these early adopters were systems that were already putting things in place,” said Ani Turner of the Center for Sustainable Health Spending at the Altarum Institute, a national health care research group based in Ann Arbor, Mich. “In a way, the contracts are rewarding behaviors they were already pursuing.”

So far, Advocate has achieved a small but significant savings of about 2 percent below projected costs, Blue Cross Blue Shield said, but it is not clear whether it can continue to make progress. Already, some Advocate hospital chiefs have expressed fears over losing revenue and warned about the threat to their financial performance. Doctors fret that their incomes may suffer. “We’re doing it because it’s the right thing to do for patients,” said Dr. Stuck, the Advocate family physician. “We’re not making more money.”

At the same time, Advocate and Blue Cross Blue Shield have no way to prevent patients that fall under the accountable-care agreement from seeing doctors outside Advocate’s network. That means patients might see doctors without an incentive to cut costs as well as deliver excellent care, eroding or even erasing the cost savings the agreement achieves.

“You’re trying to overlay a payment design onto a benefit model that allows a patient to go anywhere he wants,” said Steve Hamman of Blue Cross Blue Shield, noting that patients can undermine the advantages of the new approach if they ignore the advice or insist on unnecessary tests and procedures. “We can talk all we want about provider accountability and how important that is. But there is a measure of patient accountability that is critical as well.”

For all the obstacles, most health economists agree that accountable care organizations are one of the most promising recent developments in the giant industry. Kaufman Hall, a consulting firm that studied Advocate’s results, said its research showed that the older and the bigger a value-based care system, the more capable it proved at controlling costs — and the more it was able to influence the larger community of health care providers.

“Doctors who practice with Advocate often also practice at other hospitals,” said Mark Grube, Kaufman Hall’s managing director. “What is occurring is that even when they are practicing at hospitals that are not under value-based contracts, they’ve changed how they practice. We’re seeing declines in utilization there, too.”

That ultimately might be what helps the accountable care model catch on and hold down spending in the longer term.

“You can see a synergy with all these initiatives,” said Ms. Turner of the Altarum Institute. “There are a lot of forces out there trying to move things in the same direction.”
On Monday, after the sequester cuts forced the Federal Aviation Administration to begin furloughs for air traffic controllers, delays began to build up at airports around the country. Travelers had to wait, but nothing delayed Republicans from scurrying away from all responsibility. Speaker John Boehner started using the Twitter hashtag #ObamaFlightDelays, the latest effort in his party’s campaign to blame all the pain of the sequester on the Obama administration while claiming all the credit for its effect on reducing the deficit.

“Why is President Obama unnecessarily delaying your flight?” Eric Cantor, the House majority leader, wrote in a message on Twitter. If the president wanted to, Republicans said, he could easily cut somewhere else and spare travelers any inconvenience.

As it happens, the sequester law is clear in requiring the F.A.A. and most other agencies to cut their programs by an even amount. That law was foisted on the public after Republicans demanded spending cuts in exchange for raising the debt ceiling in 2011. Since then, the party has rejected every offer to replace the sequester with a more sensible mix of cuts and revenue increases. Mr. Boehner is so proud of that strategy that he recently congratulated his party for sticking with the sequester and standing up to the president’s demands for tax increases.

But drastic cuts in spending carry a heavy price. Republicans certainly don’t want voters they care about — including business travelers and those who can afford to fly on vacation — to feel it. They continue to claim that the $85 billion in this year’s sequester can be covered by eliminating waste, fraud, consultants, and the inevitable grant to some obscure science or art project. And, of course, to programs for the poor.

You don’t see any Republican hashtags blaming the president for cutting housing vouchers to 140,000 low-income families, which has begun. These vouchers are given by cities to families on the brink of homelessness, and about half of them go to families with children.

There aren’t any angry tweets about the 70,000 Head Start slots about to be eliminated, which is forcing some school districts to distribute these valuable services by lottery. Or about the cuts to Vista, which is hurting the program that performs antipoverty work in many states. Or the 11 percent cut in unemployment benefits for millions of jobless workers.

The voiceless people who are the most affected by these cuts can’t afford high-priced lobbyists to get them an exception to the sequester, the way that the agriculture lobby was able to fend off a furlough to meat inspectors, which might have disrupted beef and poultry operations. And what was cut in order to keep those inspectors on the job? About $25 million from a program to provide free school breakfasts.

As bad as the sequester was, it is being made worse by these special-interest demands for exceptions, as well as politically motivated attempts to deflect the responsibility for pain.

The maneuvering shows the futility of trying to reduce the deficit with crude and arbitrary cuts. Both Senate Democrats and the White House have proposed budget plans that replace the sequester with a much better mix of spending cuts and revenue increases.

On Tuesday, the Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, proposed replacing the sequester for five months with unspent money from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. Those savings may not represent real money, but the idea is no more illusory than the Republican fantasy that billions can be cut with no real effect to the country.
MONT-ST.-MICHEL, France — A dispatch in The New York Times in August 1944 described the view of Mont-St.-Michel that American soldiers saw, “racing their tanks across the Norman hills into Avranches.” Built “for war as well as worship,” the writer noted, the Mont “seems to float on the sea as gracefully as a ship under full sail, catching all the changing colors of the clouds.”

But in the years since then, the sea has dumped tons of silt around the island, slowly attaching it to the land. The main culprit appears to be a solid causeway, built in 1879, that linked the monastery to the mainland but disrupted the movement of the waters. The problem was worsened in 1969, when the government built a dam on the Couesnon River to protect farmlands from high tide, but one result was to further reduce the power of the river to push the silt back into the sea.

For Henry Adams, writing at the start of the 20th century, the Roman Catholic churches at Mont-St.-Michel and Chartres were the sublime symbols of a medieval unity of vision, founded on God, which he contrasted to the industrialized confusion of his time. Those churches, he wrote, expressed “an emotion, the deepest man ever felt — the struggle of his own littleness to grasp the infinite.”

When not jostled by crowds of tourists in the town’s cramped streets or distracted by the gift shops and ticket touts for private museums, a visitor can still feel some of that awe, especially at dawn and dusk, when the light spreads over the salt flats and the sea, or streams through the cloister and stained glass of the Abbaye du Mont-St.-Michel, known as La Merveille since at least the 12th century.

Despite its hundreds of steep steps, the abbey remains France’s fourth-most-visited national monument, the most popular outside of Paris, with about 1.3 million paying visitors a year. That is more than half the 2.5 million visitors who come to Mont-St.-Michel annually. At the abbey — where there are only 13 nuns and monks now — 55 percent of the visitors are foreigners. But the number of visitors to the Mont and the abbey is declining, down 9 percent last year, and the reason is not simply the global economic crisis, particularly acute in Western Europe.

A $285 million project to restore the sea to Mont-St.-Michel, and consequently to move cars away from its base to parking lots nearly two miles away, has created confusion for tourists. It has also created local warfare between businesspeople and the local government in a place with fewer than 90 voting, year-round residents that echoes earlier fights over the island between Normandy and Brittany.

The project to restore the Mont to the sea was first approved in 1995, and work started 10 years later. But it is only now touching the commercial heart of the town. Just this month, there were angry demonstrations at a meeting to review and revise how visitors are transported from the parking lots. Most contentious, the price of parking was increased to $16 from $11, which was already up from the $6.50 that locals, known as the Montoise, were accustomed to paying in the sometimes sea-covered lots at the base of the Mont.

The fixed causeway that blocks the tidal movement will be replaced by a curving bridge that will appear to float on the water. The tip of the bridge will be inundated by spring high tides for a few hours a few days a year, symbolizing the island.

The original idea was to leave passengers more than half a mile from the island, so they could walk over the oak planks of the new bridge and experience the sense of pilgrimage of the past. But merchants argued that the walk was too long and too slow, and that locals who like to come for a drink or dinner overlooking the sea would be put off.

Instead, the shuttles will come to within about a quarter of a mile, still requiring a walk. But the extra distance meant more shuttles and extra costs that increased the parking fee.

Cyrille Guillaume, the maître d’hotel of the Auberge St.-Pierre, said that receipts were down 30 percent in the evenings, and “at least half of the 30 percent comes from the new difficulty of access.” He compared the new system to “a hostage taking,” saying that “if access is bad, business is bad.”

Jean-Marc Bouré, the state-appointed administrator of the abbey, is also troubled. He supports the project to restore the sea and the beauty of the Mont, to bring “order” to the visiting process and to stop “the invasion of cars and buses.” But he, too, complains about the drop in visitors, and consequently of revenue, which flows to the state’s Center for National Monuments.

The mayor, Éric Vannier, who owns numerous businesses here, opposed the new shuttle plan and the higher parking price, but says that the French will complain about any changes, no matter how beneficial. “We’re in France, and anything that changes anyone’s habits a priori we don’t like. But those same people in a few years will see the beauty of the site, and this moaning will disappear.”

Mr. Vannier began to discuss the desilting project in 1983. “It’s much bigger than this focus on the shuttles,” he said. “It’s an environmental project to preserve the magical effects of the tides, so it becomes again what it was a century ago, this marvel of the West in the middle of the sea.”

Christophe Maisonobe, the operational director of the project, said the restoration was already beginning to work. A pretty new dam on the Couesnon was finished in 2009, with eight hydraulic gates that work in both directions (and that include fish ladders for salmon). The dam stores water to allow it to flow outward for a greater duration during low tides, to shove more sediment out to sea. To aid the process, two channels have been built that curve around Mont-St.-Michel. At the same time, workers are clearing out silt and vegetation from the upstream banks of the Couesnon to allow more water to flow.

“It’s working better than we expected,” Mr. Maisonobe said. The salt marshes have already retreated about 2,000 feet, he said, as the river does its work. But he cautioned that it is only when the new bridge is finished and the old causeway is finally destroyed sometime in 2015 that the full process of desilting will begin. Without the project, he said, the Mont would have been completely landlocked within 30 years.
CHICAGO — In his home office, Dr. Donald R. Hopkins has statues of the Hindu smallpox goddess and the Yoruba smallpox god. And, floating coiled up in a glass jar, something that looks like a yardlong strand of capellini but is actually one of the last Guinea worms on earth.

Smallpox is gone, and Dr. Hopkins played an important role in its death. Guinea worm disease — formally known as dracunculiasis, or “affliction with little dragons” — is down to fewer than 600 cases worldwide, from 3.5 million in 1986, when Dr. Hopkins began leading the drive to eradicate it.

He took up the cause when he was at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and now runs it as the vice president for health programs at the Carter Center, the group founded by former President Jimmy Carter to advance human rights and fight disease.

It has not been swift; several target dates for eradication have come and gone.

Nonetheless, “I’m increasingly confident that it’s less and less likely that the disease will outlive me,” said Dr. Hopkins, who is 71.

Nearly all the remaining cases are in South Sudan, which is newly independent and largely at peace. A few are in northern Mali, which is too dangerous for eradicators to work in right now but is becoming safer since French troops ousted Islamist rebels. Ethiopia and Chad, the other two countries with cases, are not at war.

Choosing a life’s work that requires visiting remote villages around the world seems counterintuitive for someone who, by his own admission, is terrified of snakes, rats, bats, airplanes, heights and food poisoning.

Ernesto Ruiz-Tiben, Dr. Hopkins’s deputy and perhaps the only person who would still consider playing a practical joke on him, recalled sidling up behind his boss in a field of knee-high grass in Pakistan as he looked warily around for snakes.

“I made a ‘ssssssss’ sound,” Dr. Ruiz-Tiben said. “Don almost turned white.”

Told that story, Dr. William H. Foege — a former C.D.C. director and himself a legend of the war on smallpox — laughed aloud and said he remembered someone bringing a harmless garter snake to the C.D.C. offices to tease Dr. Hopkins with, and trying to say it was a gift from Dr. Foege.

That Dr. Hopkins keeps going back to villages teeming with snakes “proves how important a professional challenge is to Don,” Dr. Foege said. “He’s one of the most tenacious people you’ll ever find.”

Finding His Calling

Dr. Hopkins attributes that tenacity to his Bahamian parents and to Coconut Grove, the neighborhood in Miami where he grew up; it was founded by islanders who sailed over in the 1880s looking for jobs in the new resorts springing up. He was one of 10 children of Joseph Hopkins, a carpenter, and Iva Louise Major Hopkins, a seamstress who made her children say their multiplication tables beside her sewing machine and recited the inspirational poem “Don’t Quit” to them.

“I had tons of cousins, aunts and uncles within a three-block radius,” Dr. Hopkins said. “It was definitely ‘It takes a village to raise a child.’ We didn’t rebel or get in trouble. It just wasn’t allowed. We were very serious about our studies, because of the high expectations.”

He knew he wanted to be a doctor; he won a local science fair prize for a life-size clay model of the digestive system.

Just 15 when he won a scholarship to Morehouse, the prestigious black men’s college in Atlanta, he had to quit his paper route to go.

While at Morehouse, he won a travel scholarship and spent a year in Vienna, where he lived with a local family and came to love classical music while listening to operas for 12 cents in standing room. He saw only one other black person the whole year, he said. Adults were kind, he recalled, “but one little girl skipping along in the park took one look at me and screamed her head off.”

Back in Atlanta, race relations were harsher. One incident “burned in my memory,” he said, was being with classmates on a bus in a white neighborhood, and the driver flagging down a police officer to order them to the back. (The officer refused, he said, saying, “You know the law — I can’t.”)

He still remembers the moment he picked tropical medicine. On a winter break trip to Egypt, he saw flies swarming on children’s faces, and later learned they transmitted trachoma, an eyelid infection that cause blindness.

In medical school at the University of Chicago, he was the only black student in his class. A tropical disease professor rescued him from a boring summer job dissecting sheep hearts and nudged him into worm disease research.

After graduation, he joined the Public Health Service, because he wanted to go to Africa, and to avoid being drafted for the Vietnam War.

In 1967, Dr. Foege asked him to lead the smallpox effort in Sierra Leone, which then had the world’s highest case rate, and test a new strategy: Instead of trying to vaccinate the whole country, teams would race to new outbreaks, vaccinating around each in widening circles until it died out.

The strategy worked so well, Dr. Hopkins said, that Sierra Leone was smallpox-free in less than two years. It took a decade more to eradicate the disease globally, but that was “a big morale boost.”

After a stint fighting smallpox in India, he returned home, taught tropical medicine at Harvard and rose through the C.D.C. ranks, ultimately retiring as acting director in 1987.

The Eradication Process

At the time, leading public health experts had a lofty dream: getting clean water to everyone on earth.

Dr. Hopkins suggested a more modest goal: Guinea worm, a plague of the rural poor, could be eliminated by simply filtering existing water.

The worms have been torturing humans since before history began. A calcified one has been found in an Egyptian mummy.

People become infected when they drink from ponds containing tiny freshwater crustaceans, known as copepods, that themselves have swallowed microscopic worm larvae. The larvae escape being digested by either the crustacean or the human, and grow inside the body to about a yard long. They then migrate to the skin — usually in a foot, but sometimes a hand, a breast or even an eye socket. Then they exude a burning acid to create a blister, which they burst through. As soon as the victim dips the inflamed area in cooling water, the worm (described by Dr. Hopkins as “a giant uterus”) squirts out millions of larvae, starting the cycle anew.

Eradication relies not on a vaccine, but on simple filtering technologies and huge networks of local health workers.

Those workers do many tasks. They find cases, treat ponds with a copepod-killing pesticide and teach families how to filter their drinking water. Workers also help victims inch the worms out, keep the wounds sterile and assure they do not reinfect local water.

Dr. Hopkins excels at building those networks, finding local leaders to run them, and keeping health ministers focused even as the years pass.

Mr. Carter backs him up, using his prestige as a former president, telephoning African presidents to urge them to keep the pressure on or even flying to Africa to tour villages where the worm persists. In 1995 he negotiated a four-month truce in the Sudanese civil war that became known as the Guinea worm cease-fire.

Now, with cases dropping steadily, Dr. Hopkins is optimistic. When programs are well run, he said, progress can be rapid; Ghana went from 501 cases to none in 18 months.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Carter was full of praise for Dr. Hopkins, saying, “We could not have gotten here without him,” and adding, “I have a promise from Don that he won’t retire until the last worm is gone.”

Dr. Hopkins had an answer: “If I even wanted to retire, exactly what would I say to President Carter? He’s 17 years older than me, and still going. He’s a tough man.”

His list of awards is long, and offbeat. He won a MacArthur “genius” grant in 1995 and is now on the MacArthur board. He was knighted by Mali. He was presented with a tassel-covered horse by a Niger chief (he stayed on just long enough for a photo and then quietly regifted it to the local Guinea-worm team).

In his office, he has two award plaques with pump handles on them — a reference to John Snow, the father of epidemiology, who traced a London cholera outbreak to one contaminated pump and halted it by removing the handle.

And he has nearly 30 pictures or carvings of woodpeckers, birds he has liked since he saw them in his grandmother’s oak tree; when his Carter Center subordinates do particularly good work, he inks the reports they have written with a rubber woodpecker stamp.

Asked if he ever became discouraged as the fight dragged on, Dr. Hopkins recounted a conversation he had about 25 years ago, shortly after arriving in India to fight smallpox: “I met a guy who said, ‘You guys can come here with your West African experience, but I’m Indian and I know my country and we’re never going to get rid of smallpox here.’ ”

“But we did,” he added. “So I’m sort of immunized against skepticism.”
Marvin Tolkin was 83 when he decided that the unexamined life wasn’t worth living. Until then, it had never occurred to him that there might be emotional “issues” he wanted to explore with a counselor.

“I don’t think I ever needed therapy,” said Mr. Tolkin, a retired manufacturer of women’s undergarments who lives in Manhattan and Hewlett Harbor, N.Y.

Though he wasn’t clinically depressed, Mr. Tolkin did suffer from migraines and “struggled through a lot of things in my life” — the demise of a long-term business partnership, the sudden death of his first wife 18 years ago. He worried about his children and grandchildren, and his relationship with his current wife, Carole.

“When I hit my 80s I thought, ‘The hell with this.’ I don’t know how long I’m going to live, I want to make it easier,” said Mr. Tolkin, now 86. “Everybody needs help, and everybody makes mistakes. I needed to reach outside my own capabilities.”

So Mr. Tolkin began seeing Dr. Robert C. Abrams, a professor of clinical psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College in Manhattan. They meet once a month for 45 minutes, exploring the problems that were weighing on Mr. Tolkin. “Dr. Abrams is giving me a perspective that I didn’t think about,” he said. “It’s been making the transition of living at this age in relation to my family very doable and very livable.”

Mr. Tolkin is one of many seniors who are seeking psychological help late in life. Most never set foot near an analyst’s couch in their younger years. But now, as people are living longer, and the stigma of psychological counseling has diminished, they are recognizing that their golden years might be easier if they alleviate the problems they have been carrying around for decades. It also helps that Medicare pays for psychiatric assessments and therapy.

“We’ve been seeing more people in their 80s and older over the past five years, many who have never done therapy before,” said Dolores Gallagher-Thompson, a professor of research in the department of psychiatry at Stanford. “Usually, they’ve tried other resources like their church, or talked to family. They’re realizing that they’re living longer, and if you’ve got another 10 or 15 years, why be miserable if there’s something that can help you?”

Some of these older patients are clinically depressed. The National Alliance on Mental Illness reports that more than 6.5 million Americans over age 65 suffer from depression. But many are grappling with mental health issues unaddressed for decades, as well as contemporary concerns about new living arrangements, finances, chronic health problems, the loss of loved ones and their own mortality.

“It’s never too late, if someone has never dealt with issues,” said Judith Repetur, a clinical social worker in New York who works almost exclusively with older patients, many of whom are seeking help for the first time. “A combination of stresses late in life can bring up problems that weren’t resolved.”

That members of the Greatest Generation would feel comfortable talking to a therapist, or acknowledging psychological distress, is a significant change. Many grew up in an era when only “crazy” people sought psychiatric help. They would never admit to themselves — and certainly not others — that anything might be wrong.

“For people in their 80s and 90s now, depression was considered almost a moral weakness,” said Dr. Gallagher-Thompson. “Fifty years ago, when they were in their 20s and 30s, people were locked up and someone threw away the key. They had a terrible fear that if they said they were depressed, they were going to end up in an institution. So they learned to look good and cover their problems as best they could.”

But those attitudes have shifted over time, along with the medical community’s understanding of mental illness among seniors. In the past, the assumption was that if older people were acting strangely or having problems, it was probably dementia. But now, “the awareness of depression, anxiety disorders and substance abuse as possible problems has grown,” said Bob G. Knight, a professor of gerontology and psychology at the University of Southern California, and the author of “Psychotherapy With Older Adults.”

A report by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration found that about half of all Americans ages 50 to 70 will be at high risk for alcohol and marijuana abuse by 2020, compared with less than 9 percent in 1999.

In years past, too, there was a sense among medical professionals that a patient often could not be helped after a certain age unless he had received treatment earlier in life. Freud noted that around age 50, “the elasticity of the mental process on which treatment depends is, as a rule, lacking,” adding, “Old people are no longer educable.” (Never mind that he continued working until he died at 83.)

“That’s been totally turned around by what we’ve learned about cognitive psychology and cognitive approach — changing the way you think about things, redirecting your emotions in more positive ways,” said Karl Pillemer, a gerontologist and professor of human development at Cornell, and author of “30 Lessons for Living.”

Treatment regimens can be difficult in this population. Antidepressants, for instance, can have unpleasant side effects and only add to the pile of pills many elderly patients take daily. Older patients may feel that they don’t have the time necessary to explore psychotherapy, or that it’s too late to change.

But many eagerly embrace talk therapy, particularly cognitive behavioral techniques that focus on altering thought patterns and behaviors affecting their quality of life now. Experts say that seniors generally have a higher satisfaction rate in therapy than younger people because they are usually more serious about it. Time is critical, and their goals usually are well defined.

“Older patients realize that time is limited and precious and not to be wasted,” said Dr. Abrams. “They tend to be serious about the discussion and less tolerant of wasted time. They make great patients.”

After her husband died two years ago, Miriam Zatinsky, a retired social worker who is now 87, moved into an independent living facility at Miami Jewish Health Systems. It was a difficult transition to make late in life.

“It was really strange to me, and I couldn’t seem to make any friends here,” Ms. Zatinsky said. “I really couldn’t find my way. I was having a terrible time.”

The medical director for mental health at the facility, Dr. Marc E. Agronin, a geriatric psychiatrist and the author of “How We Age,” told her that her problems were not unusual for someone in her situation, and encouraged her to make some friends. He prescribed Xanax to help with anxiety, which she said she rarely takes, and he put her in touch with a social worker, Shyla Ford, whom Ms. Zatinsky saw once a week until Ms. Ford moved (Ms. Zatinsky now has a new social worker she talks to). They strategized on how she could reach out. And slowly, she did.

“Sitting at the table for dinner, you talk to people,” said Ms. Zatinsky, who has become president of her building.

Typically, 15 to 20 sessions of talk therapy are enough to help an older patient, unless he or she is struggling with a lifetime’s worth of significant problems. Still, even long-term issues can be overcome.

After a debilitating depression in which she spent three months unable to get out of bed, Judita Grosz, 69, of Pembroke Pines, Fla., decided to see Dr. Agronin, who prescribed medication. (She also tried group therapy but didn’t like it.) He also practiced some cognitive behavioral techniques with her — for instance, requiring her to get dressed every day for a minimum of 15 minutes.

Eventually, she began to feel better. “I learned to adjust my thinking, and I don’t get as anxious as I used to,” said Ms. Grosz, who has since begun making and selling jewelry. “I found out at this age that I am artistic and creative and innovative and smart. I just woke up to the fact that I have a mind of my own. Talk about a late bloomer.”

Dr. Agronin, who still meets with Ms. Grosz monthly, said, “You might not be able to gain a magical insight and wrap up theirentire life in therapy, but you might be able to accomplish one or two small but meaningful goals.”

Sometimes, what older patients really need is help putting a lifetime in perspective.

“Things can be seen differently from the perspective of old age that relieve some guilt and challenge assumptions that you’ve had for decades,” Dr. Abrams said. “ ‘Maybe it wasn’t too terrible after all; maybe I shouldn’t blame myself.’ Maybe some of your worst mistakes weren’t so egregious, and maybe there were unavoidable circumstances you couldn’t control.”

Mr. Tolkin still stops by Dr. Abrams’s office for a monthly checkup.

“Everybody has a certain amount of heartache in life — it’s how you handle the heartache that is the essential core of your life,” Mr. Tolkin said. “I found that my attitude was important, and I had to reinforce positive things all the time.”

He said he wishes he had tried therapy years ago. But he adds: “I can’t go back. I can only go forward.”
